Schema Configuration documentation (#3349)
neo4j/graphql: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/type-definitions/schema-configuration/field-configuration.adoc

[[schema-configuration-field-configuration]]
= Field Configuration

It may be necessary to remove fields from being present in a GraphQL Object Type or a GraphQL Input Object Type.
For instance, let's consider the following type definitions:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
    title: String!
    description: String
}

type Actor {
    name: String!
    age: Int
    actedIn: [Movie!]! @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: OUT)
}
----

The type `Actor` generated from the above:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Actor {
  name: String!
  age: Int
  actedIn(where: MovieWhere, options: MovieOptions, directed: Boolean = true): [Movie!]!
  actedInAggregate(where: MovieWhere, directed: Boolean = true): ActorMovieActedInAggregationSelection
  actedInConnection(where: ActorActedInConnectionWhere, first: Int, after: String, directed: Boolean = true, sort: [ActorActedInConnectionSort!]): ActorActedInConnection!
}
----

Using the directives `@selectable`, `@settable`, and `@relationship` is possible to control how these fields are exposed.

> For instance, to not expose the field `age` in the Selection Set, by the type `Actor`, is possible to use the `@selectable` directive as follow:

Author: ```suggestion
For instance, to hide the field `age` in the Selection Set, you can use the `@selectable` directive:
```

  actedInAggregate(where: MovieWhere, directed: Boolean = true): ActorMovieActedInAggregationSelection
  actedInConnection(where: ActorActedInConnectionWhere, first: Int, after: String, directed: Boolean = true, sort: [ActorActedInConnectionSort!]): ActorActedInConnection!
}
----

== `@selectable`

This directive controls if the field will be available on queries and aggregations. 

It has two arguments:

* **onRead**: If disabled, this field will not be available on queries and subscriptions.
* **onAggregation**: If disabled, aggregations will not be available for this field

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
"""Instructs @neo4j/graphql to generate this field for selectable fields."""
directive @selectable(onRead: Boolean! = true, onAggregate: Boolean! = true) on FIELD_DEFINITION
----

=== Usage

With the following definition:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
    title: String!
    description: String @selectable(onRead: false, onAggregate: true)
}
----

The type `Movie` in the resulting schema will look:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
    title: String!
}
----

> This means that descriptions cannot be queried, either on top or on nested levels. Aggregations, however, are available for both:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that descriptions cannot be queried, either on top or on nested levels. 
Aggregations, however, are available on both:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type MovieAggregateSelection {
    count: Int!
    description: StringAggregateSelectionNullable!
    title: StringAggregateSelectionNonNullable!
}
----

== `@settable`

This directive controls if the input field will be available on creation and update mutations.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

It has two arguments:

* **onCreate**: If disabled, this field will not be available to be set on creation.

> * **onUpdate**: If disabled, this field will not be available to be set on update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **onUpdate**: If disabled, this field will not be available on update operations.
```

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
"""Instructs @neo4j/graphql to generate this input field for mutation."""
directive @settable(onCreate: Boolean! = true, onUpdate: Boolean! = true) on FIELD_DEFINITION
----

==== Usage

With this definition:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
    title: String!
    description: String @settable(onCreate: true, onUpdate: false)
}
----

The following input fields will be generated:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
input MovieCreateInput {
    description: String
    title: String!
}

input MovieUpdateInput {
    title: String
}
----

> This means the description can be set on creation, but it will not be available for update operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means the description can be set on creation, but it will not be available on update operations.
```

=== `@settable` with Relationships

> Settable can be used along with relationship fields. When an operation over a field is disabled this way, that relationship won't be available on top-level operations. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This definition can be used along with relationship fields. 
When an operation over a field is disabled this way, that relationship will not be available on top-level operations. 
For example:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
    title: String!
    description: String
}

type Actor {
    name: String!
    actedIn: [Movie!]!
        @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: OUT)
        @settable(onCreate: false, onUpdate: true)
}
----

In this case, this query is invalid, as the field `actedIn` is not available for `createActors`:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
mutation {
  createActors(input: { actedIn: { create: { node: { title: "ABC" } } } }) {
    actors {
      name
    }
  }
}
----

== `@relationship`

> It's possible to control the schema produces by a `@relationship` directive.

Reviewer: Not sure if my suggestion is correct:

```suggestion
It is possible to control the schema production through a `@relationship` directive.
```

=== Definition

// TODO add relationship  definition

> NOTE: Please note that aggregations will no longer be generated by default in the 4.x version of the library. TODO: Check migration guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
Aggregations will no longer be generated by default in the 4.x version of the library.
====

// TODO: Check migration guide
```

=== Usage

// TODO add relationship usage

> == `@readonly`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== `@readonly` label:deprecated[]
```

> NOTE: label:deprecated[] **@readonly** directive is deprecated. Please use the xref::type-definitions/schema-configuration/field-configuration.adoc#_settable[`@settable`] directive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this directive, fields will only be featured in mutations for creating in and object types for querying.
It is not mutable after creation.

[NOTE]
====
This directive is deprecated. 
Use the xref::type-definitions/schema-configuration/field-configuration.adoc#_settable[`@settable`] directive instead.
====
```

> The field will only feature in mutations for creating, and object types for querying, and will not be mutable after creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
"""Instructs @neo4j/graphql to only include a field in generated input type for creating, and in the object type within which the directive is applied."""
directive @readonly on FIELD_DEFINITION
----

== `@writeonly`

> NOTE: label:deprecated[] **@writeonly** directive is deprecated. Please use the xref::type-definitions/schema-configuration/field-configuration.adoc#_selectable[`@selectable`] directive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this directive, fields will only be featured in input types and will not be available for querying the object type through a Query or through a Mutation response.

[NOTE]
====
This directive is deprecated. 
Use the xref::type-definitions/schema-configuration/field-configuration.adoc#_selectable[`@selectable`] directive instead.
====
```

> This field will only feature in input types, and will not be available for querying the object type through a Query or through a Mutation response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----

=== Usage

With the following definition:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
    title: String!
    description: String @selectable(onRead: false, onAggregate: true)
}
----

The type `Movie` in the resulting schema will look like this:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
    title: String!
}
----

This means that descriptions cannot be queried, either on top or on nested levels. 
Aggregations, however, are available on both:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type MovieAggregateSelection {
    count: Int!
    description: StringAggregateSelectionNullable!
    title: StringAggregateSelectionNonNullable!
}
----

== `@settable`

This directive sets the availability of the input field on creation and update mutations.
It has two arguments:

* **onCreate**: If disabled, this field will not be available on creation operations.
* **onUpdate**: If disabled, this field will not be available on update operations.

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
"""Instructs @neo4j/graphql to generate this input field for mutation."""
directive @settable(onCreate: Boolean! = true, onUpdate: Boolean! = true) on FIELD_DEFINITION
----

> ==== Usage

Author: The relationship example is with `onCreate`, now that I illustrated the effect using the output schema rather than a mutation, seems clear to me!

    actors {
      name
    }
  }
}
----

== `@relationship`

There are several operations available for every relationship created using the directive `@relationship` as `create`, `connect`, `disconnect`, `connectOrCreate`, `delete`, and `aggregate`. 
However, these operations are not always needed as the `@relationship` directive allows you to define which operations should be available for a relationship by using the arguments `nestedOperations` and `aggregate`.

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
enum NestedOperations {
    CREATE
    UPDATE
    DELETE
    CONNECT
    DISCONNECT
    CONNECT_OR_CREATE
}

directive @relationship(
    type: String!
    queryDirection: RelationshipQueryDirection! = DEFAULT_DIRECTED
    direction: RelationshipDirection!
    properties: String
    nestedOperations: [NestedOperations!]! = [CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE, CONNECT, DISCONNECT, CONNECT_OR_CREATE]
    aggregate: Boolean! = false
) on FIELD_DEFINITION
----

[NOTE]
====
In version 4.0.0, `aggregate` is `true` as default.
See xref::guides/v4-migration/index.adoc#_relationship_changes[`@relationship changes`] for more information.
====

> === Usage

Author: I've talked with @mjfwebb  who implemented the `nestedOperations` argument, I believe he wants to address this argument documentation directly in this PR.

  actedInConnection(where: ActorActedInConnectionWhere, first: Int, after: String, directed: Boolean = true, sort: [ActorActedInConnectionSort!]): ActorActedInConnection!
}
----

== `@relationship`

There are several nested operations available for every field created using the `@relationship` directive. These are `create`, `connect`, `disconnect`, `connectOrCreate`, `delete`. 

However, these operations are not always needed. 
The `@relationship` directive allows you to define which operations should be available for a relationship by using the argument `nestedOperations`.

Additionally, the `@relationship` directive causes fields to be added for nested aggregations. These can be disabled using the `aggregate` argument.

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
enum NestedOperations {
    CREATE
    UPDATE
    DELETE
    CONNECT
    DISCONNECT
    CONNECT_OR_CREATE
}

directive @relationship(
    type: String!
    queryDirection: RelationshipQueryDirection! = DEFAULT_DIRECTED
    direction: RelationshipDirection!
    properties: String
    nestedOperations: [NestedOperations!]! = [CREATE, UPDATE, DELETE, CONNECT, DISCONNECT, CONNECT_OR_CREATE]

>     aggregate: Boolean! = false

Reviewer 2: Is this right? I thought this was going to be true now and false in 4.0

```suggestion
    aggregate: Boolean! = true
```

) on FIELD_DEFINITION
----

[NOTE]
====

> In version 4.0.0, `aggregate` is `true` as default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In version 4.0.0, `aggregate` is `false` as default.
```

    description: String @settable(onCreate: true, onUpdate: false)
}

type Actor {
    name: String!
    actedIn: [Movie!]!
        @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: OUT)
}
----

The following input fields will be generated:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
input MovieCreateInput {
    description: String
    title: String!
}

input MovieUpdateInput {
    title: String
}
----

This means the description can be set on creation, but it will not be available on update operations.

=== `@settable` with Relationships

This directive can be used along with relationship fields. 
When an operation on a field is disabled this way, that relationship will not be available on top-level operations. 
For example:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie {
    title: String!
    description: String
}

type Actor {
    name: String!
    actedIn: [Movie!]!
        @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: OUT)
        @settable(onCreate: false, onUpdate: true)
}
----

The following input fields will be generated:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
input ActorCreateInput {
  name: String!
}

input ActorUpdateInput {
  name: String
  actedIn: [ActorActedInUpdateFieldInput!]
}
----

> This means the `actedIn` can be updated on an update, but it will not be available on create operations.

Reviewer 2: Is is possible to add a section describing the difference between `nestedOperations` `CREATE`/`UPDATE` and `@settable` `onCreate`/`onUpdate`?

i.e. dissabling the nested create prevents creating a movie node from the actor node (but it would still be possible to create an actor and connect it to an existing movie), whereas `onCreate` would mean that the actor cannot be created with an actedIn relationship at all

For nested updates it prevents updating movie fields from an actor (but is still possible to connect/disconnect/delete/etc movies), whereas `onUpdate` makes the relationships and related types immutable (if starting at the actor)

There are several nested operations available for every field created using the `@relationship` directive. These are `create`, `connect`, `disconnect`, `connectOrCreate`, `delete`. 

> However, these operations are not always needed, the `@relationship` directive allows you to define which operations should be available for a relationship by using the argument `nestedOperations`.

Reviewer: I would suggest making it two sentences now that you made this change 😊

```suggestion
However, these operations are not always needed. 
The `@relationship` directive allows you to define which operations should be available for a relationship by using the argument `nestedOperations`.
```
